4
EQUALITY
Those who own the data own the future
In the last few decades, people all over the world were told that humankind is on the
path to equality, and that globalisation and new technologies will help us get there
sooner. In reality, the twenty-first century might create the most unequal societies in
history. Though globalisation and the Internet bridge the gap between countries,
they threaten to enlarge the rift between classes, and just as humankind seems about
to achieve global unification, the species itself might divide into different biological
castes.
Inequality goes back to the Stone Age. Thirty thousand years ago, hunter-gatherer
bands buried some members in sumptuous graves replete with thousands of ivory
beads, bracelets, jewels and art objects, while other members had to settle for a bare
hole in the ground. Nevertheless, ancient hunter-gatherer bands were still more
egalitarian than any subsequent human society, because they had very little property.
Property is a prerequisite for long-term inequality.
Following the Agricultural Revolution, property multiplied and with it inequality. As
humans gained ownership of land, animals, plants and tools, rigid hierarchical
societies emerged, in which small elites monopolised most wealth and power for
generation after generation. Humans came to accept this arrangement as natural and
even divinely ordained. Hierarchy was not just the norm, but also the ideal. How can
there be order without a clear hierarchy between aristocrats and commoners,
between men and women, or between parents and children? Priests, philosophers
and poets all over the world patiently explained that just as in the human body not all
members are equal – the feet must obey the head – so also in human society equality
will bring nothing but chaos.
In the late modern era, however, equality became an ideal in almost all human
societies. It was partly due to the rise of the new ideologies of communism and
liberalism. But it was also due to the Industrial Revolution, which made the masses
more important than ever before. Industrial economies relied on masses of common
workers, while industrial armies relied on masses of common soldiers. Governments
in both democracies and dictatorships invested heavily in the health, education and
welfare of the masses, because they needed millions of healthy labourers to operate
the production lines and millions of loyal soldiers to fight in the trenches.
Consequently, the history of the twentieth century revolved to a large extent around
the reduction of inequality between classes, races and genders. Though the world of
the year 2000 still had its share of hierarchies, it was nevertheless a far more equal
place than the world of 1900. In the first years of the twenty-first century people
expected that the egalitarian process would continue and even accelerate. In
particular, they hoped that globalisation would spread economic prosperity
throughout the world, and that as a result people in India and Egypt will come to
enjoy the same opportunities and privileges as people in Finland and Canada. An
entire generation grew up on this promise.
